The President:
The other week, men and women
across California opened up
their mailboxes to find a
letter from Anthem Blue Cross.
The news inside
was jaw-dropping.
Anthem was alerting almost a
million of its customers that it
would be raising premiums
by an average of 25%,
with about a quarter of folks
likely to see their rates go up
by anywhere from 35 to 39%.
Now, after their announcement
stirred public outcry,
Anthem agreed to delay their
rate hike until May 1st while
the situation is reviewed
by the state of California.
But it's not just Californians
who are being hit by rate hikes.
In Kansas, one insurance company
raised premiums by 10 to 20%
only after asking to
raise them by 20 to 30%.
Last year, Michigan Blue Cross
Blue Shield raised rates by 22%
after asking to raise
them by up to 56%.
And in Maine, Anthem is asking
to raise rates for some folks by
about 23%.
The bottom line is that the
status quo is good for the
insurance industry
and bad for America.
Over the past year, as families
and small business owners have
struggled to pay soaring
health care costs,
and as millions of Americans
lost their coverage,
the five largest insurers made
record profits of over $12 billion.
And as bad as things are today,
they'll only get worse if we
fail to act.
We'll see more and more
Americans go without the
coverage they need.
We'll see exploding premiums and
out-of-pocket costs burn through
more and more family budgets.
We'll see more and more small
businesses scale back benefits,
drop coverage, or close down
because they can't keep up with
rising rates.
And in time, we'll see these
skyrocketing health care costs
become the single largest
driver of our federal deficits.
That's what the future
is on track to look like.
But it's not what the
future has to look like.
The question, then, is whether
we will do what it takes,
all of us -- Democrats
and Republicans --
to build a better future
for ourselves, our children,
and our country.
That's why, next week, I'm
inviting members of both parties
to take part in a bipartisan
health care meeting,
and I hope they come in
a spirit of good faith.
I don't want to see this meeting
turn into political theater,
with each side simply reciting
talking points and trying to
score political points.
Instead, I ask members of both
parties to seek common ground in
an effort to solve a problem
that's been with us for generations.
It's in that spirit that
I've sought out and supported
Republican ideas on reform
from the very beginning.
Some Republicans want to allow
Americans to purchase insurance
from a company in another state
to give people more choices and
bring down costs.
Some Republicans have also
suggested giving small
businesses the power to pool
together and offer health care
at lower prices, just as big
companies and labor unions do.
I think both of these
are good ideas --
so long as we pursue them in
a way that protects benefits,
protects patients, and
protects the American people.
I hope Democrats and Republicans
can come together next week
around these and other ideas.
To members of Congress,
I would simply say this.
We know the American people
want us to reform our health
insurance system.
We know where the broad
areas of agreement are.
And we know where the
sources of disagreement lie.
After debating this issue
exhaustively for a year,
let's move forward together.
Next week is our chance to
finally reform our health
insurance system so it works for
families and small businesses.
It's our chance to finally give
Americans the peace of mind of
knowing that they'll be able to
have affordable coverage when
they need it most.
What's being tested here is not
just our ability to solve this
one problem, but our ability
to solve any problem.
Right now, Americans are
understandably despairing about
whether partisanship and the
undue influence of special
interests in Washington will
make it impossible for us to
deal with the big challenges
that face our country.
They want to see us focus
not on scoring points,
but on solving problems; not
on the next election but on the
next generation.
That's what we can do, and that
is what we must do when we come
together for this bipartisan
health care meeting next week.
Thank you, and have
a great weekend.